Course provides an overview of Big Data and its use in commercial, scientific, governmental and other applications. Topics include technical and non-technical disciplines required to collect, process and use enormous amounts of data available from numerous sources. Lectures cover system acquisition, law and policy, and ethical issues. It includes brief discussions of technologies involved in collecting, mining, analyzing and using results. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit.Techniques to store, manage, and use data including databases, relational model, schemas, queries and transactions. On Line Transaction Processing, Data Warehousing, star schema, On Line Analytical Processing. MOLAP, HOLAP, and hybrid systems. Overview of Data Mining principles, models, supervised and unsupervised learning, pattern finding. Massively parallel architectures and Hadoop. Notes: This course cannot be taken for credit by students of the MS CS, MS ISA, MS SWE, CS PhD or IT PhD programs. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Concepts and techniques in data mining and multidisciplinary applications. Topics include databases; data cleaning and transformation; concept description; association and correlation rules; data classification and predictive modeling; performance analysis and scalability; data mining in advanced database systems, including text, audio, and images; and emerging themes and future challenges. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CS 659, CS 750.Capstone project course for MS in Data Analytics program. Key activity is completion of a major applied team project resulting in an acceptable technical report and oral briefing. Student should plan to take this course in the last semester of studies. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May not be repeated for credit.Course focus is predominantly on prescriptive analytics with some parts focused on predictive analytics. Topics include operations research techniques and their application to decision making such as mathematical optimization, networks modeling, stochastic modeling, and multi-objective modeling. Other topics such as PERT, CPM, computer simulation, decision analysis using decision trees and quantitative value functions, and heuristic methods are covered, as well as use of contemporary computer software for problem solving. In particular, the course will extensively use MS Excel for solving the decision making problems. Case-study approach to problem solving is used. Notes: Cannot be used for credit for the PhD IT program. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces multivariate regression and random forests for modeling data. Addresses data access, variable selection and model diagnostics. Introduces foundations for visual thinking. Reviews common statistical graphics such as dot plots, box plots, q-q plots. Addresses more advanced methods such as scatterplot matrices enhanced by smoothed or density contours, and search tools for finding graphics with suggestive patterns. Notes: Course will introduce R software for analysis. A final project will involve visualization of a real data set. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Application of basic statistical techniques. Focus is on the problem (data analysis) rather than on the theory. Topics include descriptive statistics; exploratory data analysis; sampling distributions; one- and two-sample tests and confidence intervals for means, medians, proportions, and variances; and goodness-of-fit tests. Normal theory is introduced first with discussion of what happens when assumptions break down. Alternative robust and nonparametric techniques are presented. Notes: Certificate program students granted credit for only one of STAT 535 or 554. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Techniques to store, manage, and use data including databases, relational model, schemas, queries and transactions. On Line Transaction Processing, Data Warehousing, star schema, On Line Analytical Processing. MOLAP, HOLAP, and hybrid systems. Overview of Data Mining principles, models, supervised and unsupervised learning, pattern finding. Massively parallel architectures and Hadoop. Notes: This course cannot be taken for credit by students of the MS CS, MS ISA, MS SWE, CS PhD or IT PhD programs. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Concepts and techniques in data mining and multidisciplinary applications. Topics include databases; data cleaning and transformation; concept description; association and correlation rules; data classification and predictive modeling; performance analysis and scalability; data mining in advanced database systems, including text, audio, and images; and emerging themes and future challenges. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CS 659, CS 750.Introduces multivariate regression and random forests for modeling data. Addresses data access, variable selection and model diagnostics. Introduces foundations for visual thinking. Reviews common statistical graphics such as dot plots, box plots, q-q plots. Addresses more advanced methods such as scatterplot matrices enhanced by smoothed or density contours, and search tools for finding graphics with suggestive patterns. Notes: Course will introduce R software for analysis. A final project will involve visualization of a real data set. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Application of basic statistical techniques. Focus is on the problem (data analysis) rather than on the theory. Topics include descriptive statistics; exploratory data analysis; sampling distributions; one- and two-sample tests and confidence intervals for means, medians, proportions, and variances; and goodness-of-fit tests. Normal theory is introduced first with discussion of what happens when assumptions break down. Alternative robust and nonparametric techniques are presented. Notes: Certificate program students granted credit for only one of STAT 535 or 554. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces techniques for developing solutions to business problems using procedural programming as an IT resource/tool. Students apply problem solving concepts by analyzing problems and constructing, testing, and implementing algorithms using pseudocode, desk checking, and procedural programming. Topics include: program flow, control structures, programming fundamentals, and integrating program modules into a cohesive solution. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. Limited to two attempts.Functions, limits, derivative, and integral. Applications of differentiation and integration. Notes: Call Mathematical Sciences Department at 703-993-1460 for details. Students who have received credit for MATH 113 or 114 may not receive credit for this course. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit.Elementary introduction to statistics. Topics include descriptive statistics, probability, and estimation and hypothesis testing for means and proportions. Statistical software used for assignments. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Relational database management systems. Covers logical and physical database design; query languages and database programming; and examines commercial systems. Computing lab. Notes: This course does not count towards MS programs offered in the Computer Science Department and cannot be used to satisfy course requirements for PhD IT students. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to INFS 524.Course explores technical and analytical issues, solutions and gaps in processing large volumes of data by leveraging metadata. The goal is to find "facts of interest" (Intelligence) that represent threats to, or even opportunities for, a given industry or domain (e.g., healthcare, finance or national intelligence/national defense) where there is limited time. Notes: Course may be used in other Certificate or Degree programs. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit.Hands-on course discusses emerging technologies for big data analytics and their applications in real-world environments. Students apply learned concepts and best practices using several emerging technology tools simulating development, implementation, and use of big data analytical systems. Topics include RDBMS, SQL, NoSQL, R, MapReduce Programming paradigm, Hadoop, HDFS, HIVE, PIG and others in the Hadoop ecosystem for unstructured data analytics. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit.Explores Big Data Systems Engineering methodologies for consensus in system needs among stakeholders having different perspectives, competing objectives. Course goal is more efficient delivery of results coming from the rigor of traditional methods. Traditional methods establish foundation for extensions to non-traditional, streamlining methods. Principles, explained and demonstrated, are applied by students to a case study based project and individual assignments/labs. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit.Introduction to methods and tools related to knowledge mining/representation/visualization, and annotation and retrieval for Big-Data Applications from an applied perspective with the focus on emerging research problems. This course combines survey lectures with in-depth presentation of relevant issues through seminars, and hands-on experience using existing technologies and public data sources. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit.The course explores basic concepts to understand and analyze the design of information systems, and focuses on conceptual understanding of data, information, and knowledge, boundaries in representing and processing information for humans and machines, information theory, and basic techniques to organize, structure, and interact with the information through visualization. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. May not be repeated for credit.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Introduces the conversion of analog signals to digital ones and methods for using digitally processed signals in biomedical applications. Offered by Bioengineering. Limited to two attempts. Equivalent to ECE 320.Functions, limits, the derivative, maximum and minimum problems, the integral, and transcendental functions. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 115, MATH 123, MATH 124.Methods of integration, conic sections, parametric equations, infinite series, and power series. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 116, MSU 109.Partial differentiation, multiple integrals, line and surface integrals, and three-dimensional analytic geometry. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 215.First-order ODEs, higher-order ODEs, Laplace transforms, linear systems, nonlinear systems, numerical approximations, and modeling. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 216.Introduction to probability with applications to electrical and computer engineering, operations research, information technology, and economics. Basic concepts of probability, conditional probability, random variables and moments, specific probability distributions, multivariate distributions, moment-generating functions, limit theorems, and sampling distributions. Offered by Statistics. Limited to two attempts.Examines approaches for scientific research with emphasis on bioengineering. Topics include biophysical origins of bioengineering measures, tools and technology for bioengineering data collection, basic principles of experimental design and statistical analyses, and interpretation of scientific results. Special attention will be given to ethical issues associated with the collection, use, and dissemination of data. Offered by Bioengineering. May not be repeated for credit.Demonstrates the process for the creation of both medical device prototypes and medical device companies. Focuses on designing and building a robust medical device prototype and writing a business plan. Also addresses cost of healthcare, reimbursement, regulatory processes, intellectual property, and marketing and sales aspects. Course will feature lectures, videos, and guest speakers who are successful medical device entrepreneurs. Offered by Bioengineering. May not be repeated for credit.Probability and random processes are fundamental to communications, control, signal processing, and computer networks. Provides basic theory and important applications. Topics include probability concepts and axioms; stationarity and ergodicity; random variables and their functions; vectors; expectation and variance; conditional expectation; moment-generating and characteristic functions; random processes such as white noise and Gaussian; autocorrelation and power spectral density; linear filtering of random processes, and basic ideas of estimation and detection. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Representation analysis and design of digital signals and systems. Covers sampling and quantization, z-transform and discrete Fourier transform, digital filter realizations, design techniques for recursive and non-recursive filters, fast Fourier transform algorithms, and spectral analysis. Additional topics may include adaptive filtering, homomorphic digital signal processing, digital interpolation and decimation. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Provides an overview of topics in Neural Engineering. Topics covered range from sensory and motor prosthetic devices, stimulation of biological tissue, bioelectrodes and characterization techniques, brain-machine interfaces, and engineered devices to ameliorate neurodisorders. Prior knowledge in electrical or computer engineering disciplines required. Offered by Bioengineering. May not be repeated for credit.Introduction to the physical, mathematical and engineering foundations of modern medical imaging systems, medical image processing and analysis methods. Introduces engineering students to clinical applications of medical imaging. Emphasis on diagnostic ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging methods; several other modalities are also covered. Provides overview of recent developments and future trends in the field of medical imaging, discusses some of the challenges and controversies, and involves hands-on experience applying the methods learnt in class to real-world problems. Offered by Bioengineering. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to ECE 538.First course in digital-image processing; introduces scanning systems, focal plane array detectors, data acquisition methods, display hardware, image preprocessing algorithms, feature extraction, and basic image processing methods. Semester-long image processing project includes utilizing modern image processing system prototyping software. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces the fundamental concepts of musculoskeletal biomechanics, and how to apply mechanical principles to quantitatively describe and analyze movement. Topics include properties, functions, and models of the musculoskeletal structures, 3D kinematics, locomotion, and instrumentation systems applied in musculoskeletal biomechanics and movement analysis. Offered by Bioengineering. May not be repeated for credit.Provides an overview of advanced topics in biomedical signal processing with an emphasis on practical applications. Topics include introduction to physiological origins of biomedical signals, stochastic and adaptive signal processing, spectral estimation, signal modeling and analysis of nonstationary signals. Offered by Bioengineering. May not be repeated for credit.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Introduces multivariate regression and random forests for modeling data. Addresses data access, variable selection and model diagnostics. Introduces foundations for visual thinking. Reviews common statistical graphics such as dot plots, box plots, q-q plots. Addresses more advanced methods such as scatterplot matrices enhanced by smoothed or density contours, and search tools for finding graphics with suggestive patterns. Notes: Course will introduce R software for analysis. A final project will involve visualization of a real data set. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Application of basic statistical techniques. Focus is on the problem (data analysis) rather than on the theory. Topics include descriptive statistics; exploratory data analysis; sampling distributions; one- and two-sample tests and confidence intervals for means, medians, proportions, and variances; and goodness-of-fit tests. Normal theory is introduced first with discussion of what happens when assumptions break down. Alternative robust and nonparametric techniques are presented. Notes: Certificate program students granted credit for only one of STAT 535 or 554. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Marketing analytics is a systemic approach to harnessing data/information to drive effective marketing decision making . The objective of this course is to equip you with the tools required to address fundamental marketing decision problems using a data-driven approach. It will train students to view the marketing processes and relationships systemically and analytically. Offered by School of Business. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MBA 720.Develops skills to plan and implement effective marketing research studies. Topics include research design, data collection, statistical analysis, and use of database systems. Offers perspective on how managers can use market data to develop successful product or service strategies. Offered by School of Business. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MBA 721.Examines how data warehouses and data mining are used to help businesses successfully gather, structure, analyze, understand and act on relevant data, both operational and contextual. Offered by School of Business. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MBA 738.This course covers business analytics using advanced data mining methods for the purposes of developing predictive models and forecasting . The course will develop the concept of feature selection to identify what dimensions to best use for constructing decision making models. Offered by School of Business. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MBA 739.Introduces strategies and techniques for fraud prevention and detection. Focuses on financial fraud such as bribery, contract rigging and kickbacks, embezzlement, fraudulent financial reporting, payroll fraud, and misappropriation of inventory and other assets. Offered by School of Business. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MBA 744.Focuses on object-oriented programming with an emphasis on tools and techniques for developing moderate to large programs. Topics include use and implementation of linear and nonlinear data structures and the design and analysis of elementary algorithms. Offered by Computer Science. Limited to two attempts.Abstract concepts that underlie much advanced work in computer science, with major emphasis on formal languages, models of computation, logic, and proof strategies. Offered by Computer Science. Limited to two attempts.Introduces students to computer systems from a programmer's perspective. Topics include data representation, assembly and machine-level representation of high-level language programs, the memory hierarchy, linking, exceptions, interrupts, processes and signals, virtual memory, and system-level I/O. Foundation for courses on compilers; networks; operating systems; and computer architecture, where a deeper understanding of systems-level issues is required. Offered by Computer Science. Limited to two attempts.Computer subsystems and instruction set architectures. Single-cycle, multiple-cycle, and pipeline architectures. Memory hierarchy, cache, and virtual memory input-output processing. Offered by Computer Science. Limited to two attempts.Introduces ideas of discrete mathematics and combinatorial proof techniques including mathematical induction, sets, graphs, trees, recursion, and enumeration. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit.Covers the techniques to mine large datasets, including Distributed File Systems and Map-Reduce, similarity search, and data stream processing. Covers classic problems in data mining, such as clustering, association rule mining, and others from the point of view of scalability. Includes a final project to exercise concepts covered in class. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CS 757.An introduction to database management with focus on architecting databases and using them in applications. Topics to be covered include: data modeling with the Entity-Relationship model, the relational data model and its formal languages, SQL, the theory of database design, object databases, XML and Web data. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Principles and methods for knowledge representation, reasoning, learning, problem solving, planning, heuristic search, and natural language processing and their application to building intelligent systems in a variety of domains. LISP, PROLOG, or expert system programming language. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Study of the internal architecture of database systems. Topics include: physical data organization and indexing, query processing and optimization, transaction processing, database system architectures, Web services and Web data security. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Covers advanced techniques for managing, searching, and mining of various types of data such as text, web links, images, time series, video, and audio. Issues related to handling such data will be discussed, including feature selection, high dimensional indexing, interactive search and information retrieval, pattern discovery, and scalability. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CS 780.Explores statistical pattern recognition and neural networks. Pattern recognition topics include Bayesian classification and decision theory, density (parametric and nonparametric) estimation, linear and nonlinear discriminant analysis, dimensionality reduction, feature extraction and selection, mixture models and EM, and vector quantization and clustering. Neural networks topics include feed-forward networks and back-propagation, self-organization feature maps, and radial basis functions. Emphasizes experimental design, applications, and performance evaluation. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Covers statistical pattern recognition, neural network, and statistical learning theory approaches. Topics include decision theory and Bayes' theorem, density (parametric and nonparametric) estimation, linear and nonlinear discriminant analysis, SVM and kernel methods, SRM and model selection, performance evaluation, mixture of experts (AdaBoost), dimensionality reduction, feature selection and extraction, and clustering. Emphasizes experimental design, applications, and performance evaluation. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Surveys machine learning concerning development of intelligent adaptive systems that are able to improve through learning from input data or from their own problem-solving experience. Topics provide broad coverage of developments in machine learning, including basic learning strategies and multistrategy learning. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Decision-guidance systems support an iterative process of giving actionable recommendations to and extracting feedbacks from human decision-makers, with the goal of arriving at the best possible course of action. Focuses on models, languages, algorithms and applications of Decision-Guidance Management Systems, used for fast development of decision-guidance applications. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Study of Web search engines and recommender systems. Topics to include classical information retrieval methods, Boolean retrieval systems, ranked retrieval, performance metrics, Web crawling, link analysis, overall search engine architecture, fundamentals and classification of recommender systems, learning user interests and object properties, and case studies. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Information systems accessible through web and Internet are becoming prevalent. Course focuses on technologies and industry standards for accessing and manipulating persistent data that are suitable for web applications. Offered by Computer Science. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces decision theory and relationship to Bayesian statistical inference. Teaches commonalities, differences between Bayesian and frequentist approaches to statistical inference, how to approach statistics problem, and how to combine data with informed expert judgment to derive useful and policy relevant conclusions. Teaches theory to develop understanding of when and how to apply Bayesian and frequentist methods; and practical procedures for inference, hypothesis testing, and developing statistical models for phenomena. Teaches fundamentals of Bayesian theory of inference, including probability as a representation for degrees of belief, likelihood principle, use of Bayes Rule to revise beliefs based on evidence, conjugate prior distributions for common statistical models, and methods for approximating the posterior distribution. Introduces graphical models for constructing complex probability and decision models from modular components. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CSI 674, STAT 664.Practices and procedures for installing and configuring modern operating systems, including user accounts, file, print, and terminal servers, mobile computing, and disaster recovery. Through practical lab sessions, students receive real-world experiences with multiple operating systems. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. Limited to two attempts.Covers IP networking concepts and practices for IPv6 addressing, DHCP and DNS in IPv6 networks, secure communication over VPNs, VoIP architecture, Virtual Computing, Cloud Computing, MPLS, traffic monitoring and network connectivity between operating systems. Students learn the latest technologies of IP networks and understand application-level services used in the Internet. Lab sessions focus on installation of applications on virtual servers. Notes: Term project. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. Limited to two attempts.Focuses on primary aspects of data communications and networking. Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) and Internet models; Layer 1 interfaces and cabling configurations; IP network addressing, network design, router and port configurations; security protocols; static routing, RIPv2, and OSPF configurations; TCP, UDP, data reliability, and error correction methods; Telnet, FTP, TFTP, HTTP, SMTP, POP, and DNS protocols. Notes: This course is 50 percent lab work of configuration of routers and network design, implementation, and testing. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. Limited to two attempts.This course focuses on Layer 2 and 3 of the OSI model and WAN technologies. Frame Relay and ISDN, complex router configurations of Variable Length Subnet Masking (VLSM), Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR), Network Address Translation (NAT), Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP), and study of Network Management Systems available for Data Communications Networks. Layer 2 involves Ethernet-switching components, including detailed hands-on configuration covering all aspects of switches using the command-line interface method. Offered by Info Sciences & Technology. Limited to two attempts.Internet Protocol (IP) routing overview; static routing; dynamic routing; default routing; access lists; route redistribution; RIP, OSPF, IGRP, EIGRP, IS-IS, and BGP protocols submitted for comment. Real-life scenarios taught in laboratory element through exercises that involve configuring routers as network elements. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Presents an overview of technologies of interest to forensics examiners. It will provide an introduction to, software, hardware, analysis, and other aspects required for forensic examinations. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Deals with the collection, preservation, and analysis of network-generated digital evidence such that the evidence can be successfully presented in a court of law (both civil and criminal). The relevant federal laws will be examined as well as private sector applications. The capture/intercept of digital evidence, the analysis of audit trails, the recording of running processes, and the reporting of such information will be examined. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to TCOM 660.Explains computer forensics crime scene procedures, beginning with initial walk-through and evaluation; identification and collection of potential evidence; preparation of intrusion investigation; aspects of working with investigators and attorneys; reverse engineering with file identification and profiling; application of critical thinking in determination of significance of artifacts; and analysis and reporting of evidence. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Covers the collection, preservation, and analysis of digital media such that the evidence can be successfully presented in a court of law (both civil and criminal). The relevant federal laws and private sector applications will be examined, as well as the seizure, preservation, and analysis of digital media. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to TCOM 661.Introduces students to network and computer intrusion detection and its relation to forensics. Addresses intrusion detection architecture, system types, packet analysis, and products. Presents advanced intrusion detection topics such as intrusion prevention and active response, decoy systems, alert correlation, data mining, and proactive forensics. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to TCOM 663.Addresses incident detection, response, and those aspects of computer forensics pertinent to the investigation of trade secret theft, economic espionage, copyright infringement, piracy, and fraud. Procedures for gathering, preserving, and analyzing forensic evidence are discussed in detail and are applied to both computer and network incident response forensics. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to TCOM 664.Studies selected area in computer forensics under the supervision of a faculty member. A written report is required. Notes: No more than a total of six credits may be taken from a combination of CFRS 698 and CFRS 798 for credit within the CFRS program. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May be repeated within the degree for a maximum 6 credits.Reviews disassembled code for potentially malicious binary, or piece of malware, in order to gain a better understanding of how a binary functions when executed. Analyzes behavioral aspects as they are executed in a controlled environment. Environment changes (file, system, network, process, etc.), network communications, communications with remote devices, and so on, are closely observed for actionable information. Notes: Course will consist of exercises conducted in a lab environment with concurrent lectures (combined total of 3 credits for lab and lecture exercises). Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Reviews forensic evidence contained within mobile devices, including address books, call logs, text messages, video files, audio files, and Internet history. Discusses procedures and technologies associated with mobile devices and how such procedures differ from traditional computer forensics. Analyzes collected data and correlates information with data from carriers. Hands-on exercises included. Notes: Course will consist of exercises conducted in a lab environment with concurrent lectures (combined total of 3 credits for lab and lecture exercises). Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Presents the concepts, tools, and techniques used for forensic collection, identification, and analysis of the Windows registry; review the structure and layout of the Windows registry and be introduced to the types of artifacts that can be found within; evaluate and interpret data from the Windows registry with emphasis on hand-on exercises. Notes: Course will consist of exercises conducted in a lab environment with concurrent lectures (combined total of 3 credits for lab and lecture exercises). Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Presents the basic tools and techniques used to conduct a Mac and iOS forensic analysis. Application of industry best practices to both the collection and subsequent analysis of Mac iOS systems with an emphasis on hands-on exercises using currently available open-source and commercial tools. Notes: Course will consist of exercises conducted in a lab environment with concurrent lectures (combined total of 3 credits for lab and lecture exercises). Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Presents the concepts, tools, and techniques used for penetration testing, vulnerability exploitation, assessment, reporting, and forensics; teaches multiple attack vectors as well as the defensive measures protecting against such attacks; focuses heavily on post attack forensics allowing for a complete picture of the attack process. Notes: Course will consist of exercises conducted in a lab environment with concurrent lectures (combined total of 3 credits for lab and lecture exercises). Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Presents concepts of forensic attribution, context, and motivations behind computer attacks including those tied to cyber warfare and cyber terrorism activities. Tactics, techniques, and procedures of current cyber-attacks will be addressed. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May not be repeated for credit.Teaches advanced topics from recent developments and applications in various areas of computer forensics. Enhances the professional engineering community's understanding of breakthrough developments in specific areas of computer forensics. Active participation of the students is encouraged in the form of writing and presenting papers in various research areas of the advanced topic. Offered by Electrical & Computer Engineer. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 6 credits.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Rigorous introduction to problem solving through development of computer programs. Focuses on identifying algorithmic patterns in problems, describing problem solutions in high-level pseudocode, then implementing in a procedural programming language. Basic programming concepts are covered in detail including expressions, control structures, simple data types, and input/output. Program testing and debugging are discussed to verify that problems are solved correctly. Note: The department will drop students who fail to meet the prerequisites. Lectures and Labs are offered in groups. Students MUST register for a lecture and a lab from the same group. Offered by Computer Science. Limited to two attempts.Functions, limits, the derivative, maximum and minimum problems, the integral, and transcendental functions. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 115, MATH 123, MATH 124.Introduction to probability and statistics with applications to computer science, engineering, operations research, and information technology. Basic concepts of probability, random variables and expectation, Poisson process, bivariate distributions, sums of independent random variables, central limit theorem, sampling distributions, maximum likelihood and unbiased estimators, confidence interval construction, and hypothesis testing. Offered by Statistics. Limited to two attempts. Equivalent to MATH 351.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Study of analytic techniques for rational decision making that address uncertainty, conflicting objectives, and risk attitudes. Covers modeling uncertainty; rational decision-making principles; representing decision problems with value trees, decision trees, and influence diagrams; solving value hierarchies, decision trees, and influence diagrams; defining and calculating the value of information; incorporating risk attitudes into the analysis; and conducting sensitivity analysis. Note: Students may not receive credit for both SYST 473 and 573. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to OR 681.Introduces decision theory and relationship to Bayesian statistical inference. Teaches commonalities, differences between Bayesian and frequentist approaches to statistical inference, how to approach statistics problem, and how to combine data with informed expert judgment to derive useful and policy relevant conclusions. Teaches theory to develop understanding of when and how to apply Bayesian and frequentist methods; and practical procedures for inference, hypothesis testing, and developing statistical models for phenomena. Teaches fundamentals of Bayesian theory of inference, including probability as a representation for degrees of belief, likelihood principle, use of Bayes Rule to revise beliefs based on evidence, conjugate prior distributions for common statistical models, and methods for approximating the posterior distribution. Introduces graphical models for constructing complex probability and decision models from modular components. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CSI 674, STAT 664.Survey of optimization methods for students whose main focus is on application of optimization. Covers modeling, search methods, convexity, linear programming, sensitivity, networks, multiobjective optimization, heuristic methods, integer programming, nonlinear programming and dynamic programming; use of modeling languages and optimization tools, including NEOS. Notes: Course cannot be counted toward MSOR degree. Students who have taken OR 541 or 644 cannot receive credit. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Selected applied probability models including Poisson processes, discrete- and continuous-time Markov chains, renewal and regenerative processes, semi-Markov processes, queuing and inventory systems, reliability theory, and stochastic networks. Emphasis on applications in practice as well as analytical models. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to STAT 645.Students learn to manipulate large databases, create link table queries, write SQL application programs, understand sources of data conflicts, and identify methods of integrating ODBC databases with legacy data. Covers data warehousing, methods of analyzing large databases, including Bayesian belief networks and machine learning in health care context. Features semester long data integration group project. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Provides students with hands-on experience with data from electronic health records. Introduces students to causal analysis of observational data, including propensity scoring and stratification. Provides students with access to simulated data from electronic health records. Exposes students to trends that influence the quality management system and drivers for change, including measures used by CMS to strengthen value based payment. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.An introductory course to data mining and knowledge discovery in health care. Methods for mining health care databases and synthesizing task-oriented knowledge from computer data and prior knowledge are emphasized. Topics include fundamental concepts of datamining, data preprocessing, classification and prediction (decision trees, attributional rules, Bayesian networks), constructive induction, cluster and association analysis, knowledge representation and visualization, and an overview of practical tools for discovering knowledge from medical data. These topics are illustrated by examples of practical applications in health care. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Provides the knowledge and skills needed to analyze health data using modern tools. Describes analytics of administrative and clinical data. Covers concepts and tools for big data analvtics and NoSQL data analytics. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Explores the challenges of representing health care data using standardized vocabulary in health information systems. Topics include data standards and semantics, policy, and theory and practice of standardization. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Covers principles and methods of statistical data analysis and inference. Emphasizes the use and application of various data analysis techniques and their assumptions. Computer outputs will be used to demonstrate the application of statistical techniques in analyzing health related data sets. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Students analyze practice patterns and find optimal methods of improving them. Uses decision analysis and failure mode analysis in health care settings. Students integrate scientific evidence, patients' preferences, and experts' opinions to identify optimal alternatives. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces the complex subject of medical decision making. Examines systematic approaches to decision making. Explores principles governing the design, application, and maintenance of clinical decision support systems. Laboratory time provides learning experience in various applied situations. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Covers principles and methods of advanced statistical data analysis and inference with applications in health services research. Emphasizes the use and application of various data analysis techniques. including multivariate statistics. regression and longitudinal data analysis. Use of statistical software STATA demonstrates the application of statistical techniques in analyzing health related data sets. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Applies linear and logistic regression to analysis of comparative cost and effectiveness using massive data in electronic health records. Emphasizes (1) ridge regression and (2) propensity scores. Covers the following topics: (1) counterfactual framework and assumptions, (2) data balancing, (3) matching or weighting, and (4) sensitivity analysis. Offered by Health Administration & Policy. May not be repeated for credit.Rigorous introduction to problem solving through development of computer programs. Focuses on identifying algorithmic patterns in problems, describing problem solutions in high-level pseudocode, then implementing in a procedural programming language. Basic programming concepts are covered in detail including expressions, control structures, simple data types, and input/output. Program testing and debugging are discussed to verify that problems are solved correctly. Note: The department will drop students who fail to meet the prerequisites. Lectures and Labs are offered in groups. Students MUST register for a lecture and a lab from the same group. Offered by Computer Science. Limited to two attempts.Functions, limits, the derivative, maximum and minimum problems, the integral, and transcendental functions. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 115, MATH 123, MATH 124.Introduction to probability and statistics with applications to computer science, engineering, operations research, and information technology. Basic concepts of probability, random variables and expectation, Poisson process, bivariate distributions, sums of independent random variables, central limit theorem, sampling distributions, maximum likelihood and unbiased estimators, confidence interval construction, and hypothesis testing. Offered by Statistics. Limited to two attempts. Equivalent to MATH 351.Survey of optimization methods for students whose main focus is on application of optimization. Covers modeling, search methods, convexity, linear programming, sensitivity, networks, multiobjective optimization, heuristic methods, integer programming, nonlinear programming and dynamic programming; use of modeling languages and optimization tools, including NEOS. Notes: Course cannot be counted toward MSOR degree. Students who have taken OR 541 or 644 cannot receive credit. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Studies design of computerized systems to support individual or organizational decisions. Teaches systems engineering approach to decision support system (DSS) development. DSS is end product of development process, and process is key to successfully integrating DSS into organization. Any DSS is built on a theory (usually implicit) of what makes for successful decision support in given context. Empirical evaluation of specific DSS and the underlying theory should be carried on throughout development process. Course examines prevailing theories of decision support, considers issues in obtaining empirical validation for theory, and discusses empirical support that exists for theories considered. Students design decision support system for semester project. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces predictive analytics with applications in engineering, business, and econometrics. Topics include time series and cross-sectional data processing, correlation, linear and multiple regressions, time series decomposition, predictive modeling and case study. Provides a foundation of basic theory and methodology with applied examples to analyze large engineering and econometric data for predictive decision making. Hands-on experiments with R will be emphasized. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to OR 568.Introduces predictive analytics with applications in engineering, business, and econometrics. Topics include time series and cross-sectional data processing, correlation, linear and multiple regressions, time series decomposition, predictive modeling and case study. Provides a foundation of basic theory and methodology with applied examples to analyze large engineering and econometric data for predictive decision making. Hand-on experiments with R will be emphasized. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to SYST 568.Study of analytic techniques for rational decision making that address uncertainty, conflicting objectives, and risk attitudes. Covers modeling uncertainty; rational decision-making principles; representing decision problems with value trees, decision trees, and influence diagrams; solving value hierarchies, decision trees, and influence diagrams; defining and calculating the value of information; incorporating risk attitudes into the analysis; and conducting sensitivity analysis. Note: Students may not receive credit for both SYST 473 and 573. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to OR 681.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Cover topics in the applied analysis of sports, with a focus on supporting team decision-makers. Students will learn to apply modern, practical analytic techniques to sports data in search of actionable insight and a competitive edge. The four major team sports of North America (football, baseball, basketball, and hockey) will be the primary subjects of study, but the course's learning objectives will universally apply to a variety of sports. Students will become familiar with the full analytic life-cycle: asking productive and relevant research questions, finding the right data, applying the appropriate tools, discovering insight, and clearly communicating results. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces statistical graphics that show distribution features and functional relationships in the presence of noise. Introduces cognitive research guidance for graphics design and reasoning. Stresses quantitative comparisons from multiple perspectives. Features new micromaps designs for spatial and temporal comparisons. Introduces R, the grammar of graphics, and dynamic graphics software. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CSI 773.Introduces the organizational, economic, technological and societal factors (POETS) that apply to the development of large-scale, complex mega-systems, and shows that "one size does not fit all" when it comes to the project management of mega-systems. Notes: Course cannot be applied for credit towards the MS in Systems Engineering degree. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces the theory, design and implementation of multi-source information fusion systems in various domains. The course covers distinct technologies for combining data from multiple, heterogeneous sources and performing inferences in support to applications such as cyber security, Semantic Web, decision support systems, situational awareness, intrusion detection, crisis management, and others. The technical content is largely multi-disciplinary, encompassing disciplines such as knowledge engineering, ontologies, statistical learning, artificial intelligence, and data mining. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces decision theory and relationship to Bayesian statistical inference. Teaches commonalities, differences between Bayesian and frequentist approaches to statistical inference, how to approach statistics problem, and how to combine data with informed expert judgment to derive useful and policy relevant conclusions. Teaches theory to develop understanding of when and how to apply Bayesian and frequentist methods; and practical procedures for inference, hypothesis testing, and developing statistical models for phenomena. Teaches fundamentals of Bayesian theory of inference, including probability as a representation for degrees of belief, likelihood principle, use of Bayes Rule to revise beliefs based on evidence, conjugate prior distributions for common statistical models, and methods for approximating the posterior distribution. Introduces graphical models for constructing complex probability and decision models from modular components. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CSI 674, STAT 664.Course on the theory and practice of metaheuristics, i.e. solution search techniques for solving combinatorial optimization problems. It will introduce the theory, applications (scheduling in manufacturing, transportation, and in other engineering and service industries), and computational aspects of directly searching for solutions to solve computationally complex optimization problems without a well-defined analytical model. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to OR 670.Course on the theory and practice of metaheuristics, i.e. solution search techniques for solving combinatorial optimization problems. It will introduce the theory, applications (scheduling in manufacturing, transportation, and in other engineering and service industries), and computational aspects of directly searching for solutions to solve computationally complex optimization problems without a well-defined analytical model. Offered by Systems Engr & Operations Rsch. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to SYST 670.Systems of linear equations, linear independence, linear transformations, inverse of a matrix, determinants, vector spaces, eigenvalues, eigenvectors, and orthogonalization. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit.Partial differentiation, multiple integrals, line and surface integrals, and three-dimensional analytic geometry. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to MATH 215.Introduction to probability with applications to electrical and computer engineering, operations research, information technology, and economics. Basic concepts of probability, conditional probability, random variables and moments, specific probability distributions, multivariate distributions, moment-generating functions, limit theorems, and sampling distributions. Offered by Statistics. Limited to two attempts.Random variables, probability functions, special distributions, and limit theorems. Offered by Mathematics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to STAT 344.The axioms of probability, conditional probability, random variables and expectation, multivariate and conditional distributions, conditional expectation, order statistics, transformations, moment generating functions, special distributions, limit theorems. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Application of basic statistical techniques. Focus is on the problem (data analysis) rather than on the theory. Topics include descriptive statistics; exploratory data analysis; sampling distributions; one- and two-sample tests and confidence intervals for means, medians, proportions, and variances; and goodness-of-fit tests. Normal theory is introduced first with discussion of what happens when assumptions break down. Alternative robust and nonparametric techniques are presented. Notes: Certificate program students granted credit for only one of STAT 535 or 554. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Overview of statistical principles of modeling. Topics include methods for analyzing data based on generalized linear models and diagnostic methods for assessing the assumptions of such models. Methods covered include multiple regression, analysis of variance, simultaneous inference, logistic response models, and hierarchical log linear models for contingency tables. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Standard techniques of applied multivariate analysis. Topics include review of matrices, multivariate normal theory, principal components, canonical correlation, classification, factor analysis, clustering, and multidimensional scaling. Applications to data analytics. Computer implementation via a statistical package is an integral part of the course. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces statistical graphics that show distribution features and functional relationships in the presence of noise. Introduces cognitive research guidance for graphics design and reasoning. Stresses quantitative comparisons from multiple perspectives. Features new micromaps designs for spatial and temporal comparisons. Introduces R, the grammar of graphics, and dynamic graphics software. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CSI 773.The course focuses on statistical learning theory by introducing the statistical and optimization background essential for understanding statistical learning algorithms. Also discusses applications of statistical learning algorithms to the solution of important problems in many areas of science. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Conduct a research project to be chosen and completed under guidance of a graduate faculty member that results in an acceptable technical report. Notes: No more than a total of three credits may be taken from within the DAEN program. Offered by Volgenau School of Engineering. May be repeated within the term for a maximum 3 credits.Overview of statistical principles of modeling. Topics include methods for analyzing data based on generalized linear models and diagnostic methods for assessing the assumptions of such models. Methods covered include multiple regression, analysis of variance, simultaneous inference, logistic response models, and hierarchical log linear models for contingency tables. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Standard techniques of applied multivariate analysis. Topics include review of matrices, multivariate normal theory, principal components, canonical correlation, classification, factor analysis, clustering, and multidimensional scaling. Applications to data analytics. Computer implementation via a statistical package is an integral part of the course. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.Introduces statistical graphics that show distribution features and functional relationships in the presence of noise. Introduces cognitive research guidance for graphics design and reasoning. Stresses quantitative comparisons from multiple perspectives. Features new micromaps designs for spatial and temporal comparisons. Introduces R, the grammar of graphics, and dynamic graphics software. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit. Equivalent to CSI 773.The course focuses on statistical learning theory by introducing the statistical and optimization background essential for understanding statistical learning algorithms. Also discusses applications of statistical learning algorithms to the solution of important problems in many areas of science. Offered by Statistics. May not be repeated for credit.